---
title: Response to Hume’s Argument Against the Existence of God
author: harvey
layout: post
permalink: /2012/01/response-to-hume%e2%80%99s-argument-against-the-existence-of-god/
categories:
  - Philosophy
tags:
  - hume
---
# 

*This is a response to an argument which Hume presents in his “Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion.”*

Hume bases his dialectic on the idea that knowledge must rest on *a posteriori* experience rather than faith. This is because empirical evidence is essential to determining the plausibility of one idea over another in defining truth. Without experience ideas “…would all be possible; but, being all equally possible, he would never…give a satisfactory account for his preferring one of them to the rest” (182). Using this system he carefully refutes an *a posteriori* pro-God argument offered by Cleanthes. Cleanthes argues the existence of God by first asserting the similarity of the universe to a machine, something produced by man’s reason. Then, with the assumption that similar effects implies similar causes, Cleanthes claims that the universe must have been designed by an entity similar to a human being, possessing a similar faculty of thinking. This being is God. Philo dismantles this argument chiefly by attacking the validity of Cleanthes analogy. Philo claims, “Every alteration of circumstances occasions a doubt concerning the event” (183). Because there exists so many differences and unaccounted variables between man’s machines and the entire universe, Cleanthes analogy is unsound. Therefore, God cannot be claimed to exist in this manner. Philo then adds the argument that man’s faculty of reasoning exists as merely “one of the springs of the universe, as well as heat or cold, attraction or repulsion” (184). He equates the cause of thought to all other causes. Therefore, it is unreasonable to project the cause of thought as the ultimate cause of the universe. In his typical fashion, Hume uses skepticism to refute the God argument. Finally, assuming that such a grand analogy could be made, Hume subtly places “generation,” the system of birth observed in animals, as a more probable cause than reason. This is because humans have observed that reason derives from generation, but generation has not been observed to derive from reason. Therefore, generation exists as an earlier cause, thus it is more likely to be the ultimate cause.

Hume’s structured and logically rigorous manner of argument impresses me. The logical progression from one statement to the other appears quite sound. However, I question Hume’s assumption that *means* adapt to *ends*. In both Cleanthes and Philo’s arguments, there was a tacit acceptance of this idea without addressing the possibility that *ends *merely stem from *means*. What humans observe as the product of design may very well exist as the logical effect of the random arrangement of the universe. What we assume to be means may merely be the product of random chance. For instance, the arrangement of our solar system may have been due to chance rather than some intended cause. Perhaps Hume did not mean to imply this. Nevertheless, he implies a certain directed, or even conscious, *intent* in his idea of cause. I wish Hume addressed this assumption and clarified the nature of his idea of “cause.” I also question Hume’s seemingly casual relegation of human thinking as one of hundreds of causes. He describes it as “so minute, so weak, so bounded a principle” and “this little agitation of the brain which we call ‘thought’” (184). As a philosopher I believe Hume should hold higher regard for his single most important ability. It seems that he has extended his ideal of skepticism too far. Nevertheless, I consider his dismissal of thought as an interesting idea which could potentially inspire certain other ideas. For this reason, I will continue contemplating it.